Merge Sort 

Merge Sort is a divide and conquer algorithm. It works by recursively breaking down a problem into two or 
more sub-problems of the same or related type, until these become simple enough to be solved directly. 
The solutions to the sub-problems are then combined to give a solution to the original problem. So Merge Sort first 
divides the array into equal halves and then combines them in a sorted manner.
worst-case time complexity being Ο(n log n), it is one of the most respected algorithms.


working of Merge Sort - 

       1. If it is only one element in the list it is already sorted, return.
       2. Divide the list recursively into two halves until it can no more be divided.
       3. Merge the smaller lists into new list in sorted order.

Algorithm- 

Step 1 − if it is only one element in the list it is already sorted, return.
Step 2 − divide the list recursively into two halves until it can no more be divided.
Step 3 − merge the smaller lists into new list in sorted order.



Merge Sort Applications
   - Inversion count problem
   - External sorting
   - E-commerce applications



Time Complexity	 

    Best	    O(n*log n)
    Worst	    O(n*log n)
    Average	    O(n*log n)


Best Case Complexity - It occurs when there is no sorting required, i.e. the array is already sorted. 
The best-case time complexity of merge sort is O(n*logn).

Average Case Complexity - It occurs when the array elements are in jumbled order that is not properly ascending 
and not properly descending. The average case time complexity of merge sort is O(n*logn).

Worst Case Complexity - It occurs when the array elements are required to be sorted in reverse order. 
That means suppose you have to sort the array elements in ascending order, but its elements are in descending order. 
The worst-case time complexity of merge sort is O(n*logn).



       Space Complexity 	O(n)
       Stability        	Yes
 The space complexity of merge sort is O(n). It is because, in merge sort, an extra variable is required for swapping.


 Merge Sort Code - 

 code 1 ;






 code 2 ;